================================================================================
LETTER #68
================================================================================

TO: SUSAN   PETIGRU   KING
LOCATION: Columbia
DATE: 11  May,  1843.
SOURCE: Lines 12535-13037 of LifeLettersAndSpeeches.txt

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I  believe  you  are  in  George  Street  dear  Sue,  because  that  was


'James  Louis  Petigru  Til

your  intention  and  besides  it  is  told  me  by  Mr.  King,  and  I  hope
your  good  behaviour  will  be  equal  to  the  kind  reception  which
your  allies  have  given  you.  I  have  often  said  that  I  should  be
as  much  chagrined  to  turn  a  bad  wife  out  of  my  nursery,  as  to
send  a  student  from  the  office  to  be  rejected.  But  it  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  my  feelings  are  expressed  by  the  comparison.
When  I  consider  what  a  sweet  child  you  were,  so  docile,  so  gentle
and  so  lively,  as  to  get  the  imputation  of  being  Pa's  pet,  I  can
not  doubt  that  your  better  feelings  will  resume  the  ascendant
and  that  you  will  place  your  love  of  distinction  upon  the  doing
of  what  is  right.  If  one  is  to  be  proud  of  any  thing,  it  should  be
of  self  control,  and  of  acting  well.  Even  if  one  had  no  instinc-
tive love  of  excellence,  and  was  to  form  one's  behaviour  with
reference  only  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  greatest  degree  of  satis-
faction, it  would  be  one's  interest  to  consult  in  the  first  place  the
happiness  of  those  who  are  influenced  by  one's  way  of  conduct-
ing. The  proof  of  this  is  seen  in  the  effect,  which  politeness  has
on  those  who  are  attentive  to  its  rules.  For  politeness  is  nothing
more  than  habitual  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  those  we
converse  with  and  the  making  it  a  rule  never  to  give  ourselves  the
preference.  Yet  every  one  may  see  that  those  persons,  whose
good  breeding  leads  them  to  consult  the  feelings  of  others,  enjoy
far  more  consideration  than  if  they  showed  by  their  manners
that  their  object  was  to  gratify  themselves.  And  that  which  is
true  in  the  lesser  morals,  is  also  true  in  the  great  virtues.  For,  as
they  that  give  themselves  the  preference,  are  most  apt  to  be
slighted,  so,  those  who  do  not  cultivate  the  virtues  of  justice  and
benevolence,  can  not  enjoy  their  own  minds  in  peace.  The
things,  which  make  one  worthy  of  the  esteem  of  others  are  the
same  which  secure  to  us  our  own  esteem,  without  which  life  can
scarcely  be  tolerable.  The  instances  which  come  under  our  own
eyes  of  persons  who,  after  tormenting  others,  become  like  poor
Mrs.  McRee,  their  own  executioners  and  go  mad  from  sheer  ill
nature  and  peevishness,  should  speak  a  terrible  warning  to  all
that  are  sensible  of  any  infirmity  of  temper.  I  confess  my  dear
Sue,  that  I  was  grieved  when  I  heard  you  some  days  ago,  under
the  influence  of  a  slight  vexation,  express  pleasure  in  the  pros-
pect of  giving  poor  Anne  Deas  as  much  trouble  as  you  could  in
the  alterations  of  the  dress  which  displeased  you.  I  had  not  the
opportunity  then  of  letting  you  know  the  painful  impression
this  made  on  me,  and  tho'  she  is  a  humble  individual  and  T  dare
say  you  did  not  in  fact  use  your  power  to  annoy  her,  my  affec-
tion was  wounded  by  a  momentary  display  of  a  feeling  that  ren-
dered you  less  worthy  of  esteem.  Perhaps  the  homily  is  too
long,  but  I  would  rather  say  many  words  after  the  occasion  of
offense  is  past,  than  run  the  risk  of  irritating  the  ebulition  that
I  regretted.  I  have  just  got  a  letter  from  your  mother.  And
oh,  such  a  letter!     Sally  Ford  comes  in  for  her  full  share,  because


228  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

unfortunately,  I  wrote  while  she  was  in  the  house,  that  we  would
miss  her  when  she  went  away.  I  came  here  sick  and  was  so  a
week,  but  I  am  well  now.  It  is  rather  an  idle  life  that  we  are
leading  here  and  unprofitable.  The  Dowager  has  just  written
to  me  that  she  will  be  here  on  Saturday,  and  stay  till  Monday.
If  green  trees  and  trim  gardens  make  town  life  agreeable,  Colum-
bia has  a  fair  claim  to  the  friendship  of  its  visitors.  Indeed,  I
think  it,  in  spite  of  all  college  associations,  a  very  pretty  place;
at  the  same  time  one  must  confess  it  is  rather  a  dull  one.  Our
friend  Nathan  Davis  is  here  a  practitioner  of  the  law,  and  as  it
is  said,  an  admirer  of  Miss  Kate  Hampton,  but,  from  what  I
heard  at  Mr.  Hampton's,  where  I  spent  last  Sunday,  I  am  rather
of  opinion  that  the  Reciprocity  is  all  on  one  side.  Adieu  dear
Sue,  my  parental  salutations  attend  on  you  and  Henry.

Your  Father.

P.  S. — Your  watch  has  done  marvelously  well.  Till  yesterday
it  went  like  a  soldier  on  drill.  At  present  it  has  taken  a  start  and
is  a  full  hour  ahead  of  every  watch  in  town.  I  don't  think  I  will
be  home  for  a  week.

Oration  at  Fort  Moultrie,  Sullivan's  Island,  June  28, 1844

From  the  Charleston  Courier^  July  4,  1 844.

History  is  justly  entitled  to  the  first  place  in  the  list  of  human
sciences.  The  future  is  unknown,  and  the  present  bounded  by
the  very  narrow  circle  of  our  senses;  but  the  past  is  an  immense
field,  where  every  faculty  finds  employment,  and  from  which
both  old  and  young  obtain  the  instruction  by  which  reason  is
invigorated  and  judgement  is  matured.  Happy  are  they  who
can  profit  by  the  experience  of  others — happy  are  the  people
who  can  appeal  to  their  own  history  for  examples  of  virtue
and  models  of  imitation.  Nor  is  every  people  so  distinguished.
For  when  we  look  back  to  the  beginning  of  history,  some
few  ages  stand  out  in  bold  relief;  but  far  the  greater  part  of  the
past,  undistinguished  by  the  broad  expanse,  is  hid  from  our
view  by  a  veil  as  deep  as  that  which  hangs  over  futurity.  It  is
not  everywhere,  nor  in  every  age  that  men  have  risen  to  the
distinction  of  furnishing  to  after  times  an  incentive  to  virtue  in
the  honor  connected  with  their  names.  But  to  a  people  who
possess  a  history  illustrated  by  the  virtues  of  their  ancestors,  no
duty  can  be  more  agreeable  than  the  preservation  of  their  ances-
tral fame.  In  all  ages  pilgrims  have  repaired  with  pious  zeal
to  the  cradle  of  religion  and  have  felt  their  faith  confirmed,  and
their  hearts  warmed  and  purified  by  the  contemplation  of  scenes
and  objects  connected  with  sacred  history.

Nor  is  it  less  natural  to  mingle  the  sentiments  of  patriotism


James  Louis  Petigru  229

with  those  of  reverence  and  admiration,  and  to  recur  with  a
fond  pride  to  the  times  and  places  rendered  memorable  by  the
toils  or  the  triumphs  of  our  countrymen.  Such  is  the  sentiment
which  leads  the  inhabitants  of  Sullivan's  Island  to  celebrate  this
day.  Nor  is  the  ground  on  which  we  stand  devoid  of  the  inter-
est belonging  to  historical  associations.  For  we  tread  the  scene
where  a  great  action  passed  away — and  we  breathe  the  air
where  Moultrie,  sixty-eight  years  ago,  stood  to  meet  the  invader
on  the  threshold  of  his  country.  Even  this  barren  Isle,  scarcely
raised  above  the  margin  of  the  sea,  with  its  shore  washed  by  the
tides,  and  its  heaps  of  sand  driven  by  the  wind,  becomes  an
object  of  interest  from  the  associations  of  this  day.  And  the
ground  that  we  survey,  little  distinguished  as  it  may  seem  to  the
eye,  crowned  by  no  lofty  forests,  nor  adorned  with  fields  of  wav-
ing grain,  when  viewed  by  the  glass  of  history  has  more  charms
for  the  reflecting  mind  than  many  a  fertile  field.  For  here,  as  to
a  solemn  judgment,  came  the  men  of  Carolina,  to  submit  the
cause  of  freedom  to  the  God  of  battles;  and  here,  by  indulgent
heaven,  was  granted  to  humanity  that  victory  of  native  virtue
over  mercenary  discipline,  which  adds  another  glorious  page  to
the  record  of  Salamis  and  Marathon.

Nor  is  it  easy  to  overrate  the  importance  of  this  action.  It
was  one  of  the  earliest  events  of  the  struggle  and  had  an  immense
influence  on  the  opinions  of  men  concerning  the  issue  of  the  con-
troversy. This  was,  as  far  as  America  was  concerned,  essentially
a  war  of  opinion,  it  was  an  issue  between  the  people  and  their
rulers — it  was  a  trial  between  the  new  world  and  the  old — a
question  between  the  natural  privileges  of  men  and  the  pre-
scriptive rights  of  those  who  had  long  controlled  their  destinies.
The  nationality  of  the  United  States  was  a  new  term,  and  the
establishment  of  a  popular  government  was  a  work  that  had  no
recent  examples.  Ages  had  passed  away  since  any  successful
opposition  had  been  made  by  popular  combination  against  the
discipline  and  resources  of  established  governments.  The  name
of  a  republic  had  almost  disappeared  from  the  world,  and  the
pretentions  of  America  to  an  equality  with  Europe  were  till  then
unheard.  The  nations  of  the  earth  seemed  to  have  settled  upon
certain  principles,  embracing  a  gradation  of  ranks,  as  essential
to  social  order,  and  their  governments,  by  modern  improve-
ments in  the  arts  of  peace  and  war,  had  increased  beyond
all  former  example,  their  power  of  maintaining  order  and  repres-
sing opposition.  The  great  powers  of  England,  France  and
Spain  had  divided  the  new  world  among  them,  and  ruled  over
America  by  the  general  acquiescence  of  mankind.  To  disturb
received  opinions,  to  deny  the  throne,  or  to  question  the  right  of
European  ascendency,  seemed  not  only  rash,  but  unnatural.  It
was  at  such  a  time  that  a  voice  from  America  asserting  the  great
principles  of  justice,  broke  upon  the  drowsy  ear  of  the  world.


230  ^(/^j  Letters  and  Speeches

It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  occasion  to  enter  into  the  con-
troversy between  England  and  the  Colonies.  And  it  is  less
important  to  do  so,  as  the  cause  of  the  quarrel  may  be  easily
separated  from  the  circumstances  by  which  it  was  provoked.
There  was  an  inevitable  tendency  to  separation  and  probably  it
was  not  in  human  prudence  to  avoid  a  catastrophe  which  the
progress  of  events  conspired  to  bring  about.  England  was  then,
as  now,  the  most  vigorous,  the  most  progressive,  and  the  most
uniformly  successful  of  the  European  powers.  The  spirit  ot  her
freedom  and  enterprise  was  reflected  on  her  colonies;  and  they
had  advanced  in  prosperity  and  civilization  beyond  the  example
of  any  dependent  people.  But  these  circumstances,  however
calculated  to  mislead  a  superficial  observer,  as  promising  a  last-
ing connection  between  the  metropolis  and  the  colony,  were  in
fact  so  many  causes  of  an  approaching  rupture.  The  prosperity
of  the  colonies,  as  it  fitted  them  then  for  a  separate  nationality,
rendered  their  dependence  on  a  transatlantic  power  every  day
more  and  more  inadequate  to  their  wants.  It  may  well  be  doubted
whether  any  regulations  of  policy  could  have  reconciled  the  con-
nection much  longer  with  the  true  interests  of  either  party.  The
parallel  between  the  State  and  the  individual,  in  this,  as  in  so
many  other  cases,  suggests  an  instructive  lesson.  The  same  law
by  which  the  individual  passes  from  youth  to  manhood,  termin-
ates the  period  of  parental  control.  And  the  Colony,  by  the
development  of  the  resources  of  a  nation,  is  compelled  by  the
law  of  self-defense  to  the  assumption  of  national  rights.  It  was
not  merely  that  the  arrogance  or  injustice  of  a  government,  at
the  distance  of  three  thousand  miles,  provoked  or  justified  resis-
tance, but  that  no  connection  could  be  maintained  unless  upon
terms  of  subordination;  and  that  such  subordination  was  no
longer  in  conformity  with  the  true  relations  between  the  coun-
tries. The  division  of  the  earth  into  separate  independent
communities  is  essential  to  the  plan  of  Providence  in  the  consti-
tution of  human  society.  It  is  impossible  for  the  world  to  be
united  under  one  government,  and  every  country  must  be
responsible  for  its  own  institutions.  The  subjection  of  any
country  to  the  authority  of  strangers,  is  a  yoke  which  none  but
the  weak  will  bear.  It  was  a  noble  feeling  which  the  people  of
America  partook  with  all  generous  minds,  when  they  determined
to  assume  an  independent  station  with  full  knowledge  of  all  the
burthens  and  sacrifices  that  such  a  measure  implies.  And  the
self  devotion  and  gallantry,  with  which  the  men  of  Carolina
lined  the  walls  of  Fort  Moultrie  were  an  earnest  of  the  sincerity
of  their  professions,  and  a  pledge  of  their  fitness  for  freedom.
Like  that  of  Bunker  Hill,  this  action  preceded  the  formal  decla-
ration of  independence,  and  like  it  too  in  the  result,  the  courage
and  constancy  of  the  sons  of  America  were  thereby  proved  by
the  din  of  battle  to  be  equal  to  their  pretentions;  and  the  repulse


James  Louis  Petigru  231

of  Sir  Peter  Parker's  Squadron,  by  an  inexperienced  garrison,
before  a  feeble  fort,  united  the  men  of  Massachusetts  and  Caro-
lina by  the  baptism  of  fire,  in  the  holy  name  of  country,  men  and
brothers.  Of  the  particulars  that  combined  to  render  this  tri-
umph of  our  arms  a  just  source  of  pride,  it  is  unnecessary  to
speak,  for  they  are  as  familiar  to  us  as  the  lessons  of  infancy.
Nor  is  there  any  fear  that  the  heroic  daring  of  the  chief,  who
scorned  the  cautious  advice  of  abandoning  a  position  deemed
untenable,  and  resolved  to  defend  the  fort  or  be  buried  in  its
ruins,  will  be  lost  upon  the  youth  of  our  country  or  that  the
gallantry  of  the  men  who  so  nobly  seconded  his  zeal  will  be
allowed  to  fade  from  their  recollections.

Nor  is  it  necessary  to  dwell  on  the  long  series  of  seven  bloody
years,  through  which  the  country  passed,  before  the  consum-
mation of  the  patriot's  hope  was  crowned  by  independence.  It
is  not  for  lessons  in  the  strategy  of  armies  or  the  arts  of  war  that
the  history  of  this  eventful  period  should  be  read.  Other  nations
have  known  how  to  set  armies  in  the  field,  and  by  what  means  to
shake  the  defense  of  cities,  or  overwhelm  the  destined  victim
with  mingled  storm  of  battle.  But  the  history  of  the  American
war  furnishes  other  lessons,  replete  with  knowledge  more  con-
soling to  mankind.  From  the  records  of  that  period  humanity
may  learn  confidence,  and  patriots  trust  in  the  native  virtue  of
the  people.

The  trials  through  which  the  people  of  America  had  to  pass
were  sharp  and  painful.  Of  these  trials  her  soldiers  bore  the
brunt.  The  hardships  of  war  were  aggravated  by  the  want  of
magazines,  of  forts,  of  ships,  of  regular  commissariats,  and  all  the
material  which  enters  into  the  exercise  of  the  soldier's  calling.

Nor  was  it  only  of  inadequate  supplies  that  they  had  to  com-
plain, but  all  these  defects  were  rendered  more  intolerable  by  a
civil  organization  too  imperfect  to  direct  efficiently  the  opera-
tions of  war.  Scanty  means  were  rendered  still  more  inadequate
by  the  weakness  of  the  civil  government.  Against  these  and
such  evils  they  had  one  compensation  in  the  Spirit  of  the
American  people.  Nor  even  did  that  element  of  power  more
nobly  vindicate  its  energy  in  asserting  the  superiority  of  mind
over  matter.  By  public  spirit  the  States  were  held  together,
and  the  people  suffered  without  despair.  Huge  armaments  and
ponderous  trains  of  artillery,  with  obedient  hosts  of  mercenaries,
may  overrun  a  country  and  spread  desolation  far  and  wide;  and
like  Xerxes,  the  master  of  myriads,  glittering  in  the  panoply  of
war  may  deem  his  hosts  invincible,  but  like  all  material  agents
their  sphere  is  limited;  they  feel  the  wear  and  tear  of  time,  they
are  exposed  to  the  casualties  of  fortune,  and  by  the  ocean  waves
or  winter  frosts  they  are  scattered  or  dispersed.  The  armies  of
England  were  numerous  and  well  appointed,  and  fell  upon  the
several  points  of  attack  as  easy  prey.     But  the  indomitable


232  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

spirit  of  the  people  was  progressive  and  indestructible.  New-
recruits  supplied  the  waste  of  war.  Years  rolled  on  and  the
clang  of  arms  that  had  roused  the  sire  and  called  him  from  his
plow,  still  rang  in  the  ears  of  a  new  generation,  ready  and  willing
to  swell  the  same  martial  din.  Yorktown  saw  the  pride  of  the
invader  humbled,  and  the  final  triumph  of  the  American  arms
was  followed  by  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Independence  of
the  United  States.

But  military  fame  constitutes  the  least  part  of  the  honor  due
to  the  soldiers  of  America.  War,  after  all,  is  the  reign  of  vio-
lence and  violence  is  the  scourge  of  the  human  race.  But  it
is  the  peculiar  glory  of  that  army  which  bore  the  brunt  of  this
sharp  contest,  that  when  the  war  was  over,  they  laid  aside  with
the  sword  the  love  of  war— and  with  peace  resumed  the  peaceful
arts  in  the  retirement  of  private  life.  Honored  in  all  times  be
that  Patriot  soldiery  who  served  a  bleeding  country  in  all  its
privations,  and  bore  the  delay  even  of  the  modest  recompense
due  to  their  toils,  with  the  fortitude  of  the  soldier  and  the
modesty  of  the  citizen.  What  are  the  boasted  triumphs  of  those
who  have  dyed  the  earth  in  blood,  compared  with  the  fame  of
that  army,  which  after  a  successful  war,  laid  down  their  arms
before  their  own  claims  were  satisfied.^  That  a  stable  govern-
ment, with  the  resources  arising  from  a  perfect  command  of  the
civil  force,  should  raise  and  disband  troops  at  their  pleasure,  is
the  common  privilege  of  a  well  governed  State.  But  this  was  a
Revolutionary  army,  enlisted,  not  in  the  name  of  obedience,  but
of  resistance  to  the  established  Authority.  An  army  which  had
made  all  the  sacrifices  of  a  hard  service  without  the  emoluments
of  the  camp — which  had  felt  the  steel  of  the  enemy  without
feeling  the  cares  of  a  Government  intent  on  the  supply  of  their
wants.  They  had  by  their  arms,  set  up  the  civil  power  that
now  disposed  of  their  claims  to  justice.  Every  selfish  feeling
prompted  them  to  take  justice  into  their  own  hands,  and  the
most  plausible  arguments  were  at  hand  to  excuse  the  step.
They  were  organized,  and  the  weakness  of  the  Government
required  an  infusion  of  energy.  The  State  stood  in  need  of
reformation  and  their  wrongs  cried  aloud  for  justice.  How
easy  in  such  circumstances  to  cover  ambitious  designs  under
the  cloak  of  the  public  good.  To  their  everlasting  honor  they
resisted  the  temptation  and  imposed  on  themselves  a  forbearance
without  example.  With  arms  in  their  hands,  they  submitted  to
the  civil  authority,  as  men  who  had  no  weapons  but  persuasion.
So  rare  an  instance  of  duty  has  deservedly  raised  the  character
of  military  men  and  made  them,  in  this  country,  objects,  not  of
jealousy,  but  of  popular  regard.  But  such  moderation  could
only  be  expected  from  men  under  the  most  enlightened  influence,
and  is  accounted  for  by  the  preeminent  character  of  their  leader.
They  trusted  in  Washington  and  set  the  seal  to  the  gratitude  of


James  Louis  Petigru  233

posterity,  by  yielding  an  implicit  obedience  to  his  counsel  and
example.  A  nation  may  well  be  proud  of  military  fame;  but  the
character  of  Washington  has  added  to  the  estimation  of  man-
kind, and  forms  part  of  the  inheritance  of  the  human  race.  We
may  boast  of  the  valor  of  our  troops,  but  submission  to  the  law
and  respect  for  the  liberties  of  their  country,  are  the  crowning
glory  of  the  patriot  army  that  fought  the  battle  of  independence.
They  laid  no  sacrilegious  hand  upon  the  arc  of  liberty,  and
showed  themselves  formidable  only  to  the  enemies  of  their
country.

The  example  of  the  army  was  well  calculated  to  increase  the
joy  with  which  the  return  of  peace  was  hailed,  and  to  inspire  a
hope  that  the  reign  of  justice  had  commenced.  But  peace  had
its  dangers;  the  authority  of  the  law  was  inadequate  to  the  pres-
ervation of  the  public  defence;  and  the  Government  was  neither
able  to  obtain  nor  to  enforce  justice.  The  task  was  still  incom-
plete, and  many  doubts  and  fears  were  still  to  be  overcome
before  the  fair  temple  of  beauty  could  be  reared  upon  the  soil  of
Columbia.  Hitherto,  Liberty  was  resistance,  and  her  cause  was
the  law  of  the  strongest.  But  now  Liberty  was  to  be  made  an
institution,  and  freedom  reconciled  with  power.  And  although,
to  the  generality  of  mankind,  dazzled  with  show,  and  inattentive
to  the  silent  causes,  which,  in  the  moral  as  in  the  natural  world,
bring  about  the  order  and  harmony  of  things,  the  organization  of
a  community  may  seem  to  be  easy,  yet  to  the  reasoning  mind  no
enterprise  is  so  arduous.  Too  long,  indeed,  have  men  been
accustomed  to  pay  unbounded  homage  to  those  abilities  that  are
most  conspicuous  in  the  service  of  selfish  ambition.  But  when
civilization  shall  have  more  widely  diffused  its  benignant  sway,
they  will  learn  to  reserve  their  highest  praise  for  those  whose
labors  are  most  eminently  conducive  to  the  happiness  of  man-
kind. Who  will  compare  the  bloody  laurels  of  the  conqueror
with  the  mild  lustre  that  surrounds  the  brow  of  the  magistrate,
who  gives  law  to  mankind  or  hesitate  to  postpone  the  boisterous
orator,  or  keen  politician  to  the  simple  and  modest  student  of
nature,  who  has  so  recently  enriched  the  human  family  with  the
present  of  the  magnetic  telegraph?  What  does  it  signify  that
men  have  fought  and  bled,  and  signalized  the  bloody  arena  of
their  toils  by  great  exhibitions  of  moral  or  physical  strength,  if
the  result  has  been  barren  of  any  real  good  or  solid  benefit  to
society?  But  they  who  have  developed  the  resources  of  their
country,  who  have  increased  the  amount  of  rational  and  innocent
enjoyment  or  diminished  the  evils  of  human  life,  are  justly  hailed
as  the  benefactors  and  fathers  of  mankind.  And  who  so  justly
entitled  to  this  distinction  as  those  who  have  bestowed  on  their
country  by  wise  institutions,  the  permanent  blessings  of  justice?
In  this  class  the  great  men  of  America  are  entitled  to  distin-
guished place,  and  we  may  celebrate  this  anniversary  not  merely


234  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

with  the  honors  due  to  a  brilliant  feat  of  arms,  but  as  the  open-
ing of  a  new  and  better  state  of  things.  For  when  the  toils  of
war  were  over,  the  American  people  dedicated  the  liberty  which
they  had  won  to  the  noble  purpose  of  establishing  among  them
for  generations  the  blessings  of  freedom,  justice  and  equality  of
rights.  By  this  result  the  true  value  of  liberty  is  known,  and  by
the  success  of  the  Federal  Constitution  the  real  amount  of  good
obtained  by  American  Independence  must  in  the  end  be  esti-
mated. For  liberty  is  but  a  name,  where  the  weak  are  not  pro-
tected against  the  strong,  nor  justice  armed  with  the  power  of
defending  the  innocent,  and  punishing  the  guilty — and  it  is  here
that  experience  warns  us  of  the  rocks  on  which  men  in  pursuit  of
liberty  have  so  often  split,  and  calls  on  us  to  admire  and  main-
tain the  work  of  the  Authors  of  the  Constitution.  To  reconcile
the  greatest  degree  of  freedom  with  the  perfect  security  of  pri-
vate and  natural  rights,  has  baffled  the  skill  of  the  wisest  of  man-
kind. For  who  shall  control  where  all  are  equal,  or  how  shall
the  people  restrain  the  will  of  the  people?

To  accomplish  a  work  to  which  the  wise  might  look  with
despair;  to  give  to  the  world  an  example  of  a  Republic  that  might
recall  the  glories  of  that  proud  name  in  ancient  times  without
admitting  the  elements  of  discord  which  so  often  shook  the  frame
of  those  celebrated  states;  to  emulate  the  vigor  of  those  ancient
commonwealths  without  impairing  the  safety  and  sanctity  of
private  rights,  so  essential  to  modern  civilization — these  were
the  generous  aspirations  of  the  men  of  the  revolution,  and  the
consummation  of  that  great  struggle,  to  the  memory  of  which
we  dedicate  this  day.

To  build  up  a  system  on  the  principles  of  natural  justice  might
seem  to  be  an  easy  task — but  like  the  imitation  of  nature,  it
requires  the  highest  degree  of  skill  and  most  elaborate  work-
manship. To  this  task  the  fathers  of  American  Liberty  brought
the  result  of  all  their  experience  and  long  reflection  upon  the
eventful  scenes  through  which  they  had  passed.  In  the  union
of  the  States  they  found  a  principle  that  answered  to  their  wants.
On  that  principle  they  rested  their  plan.  On  the  Union  of  the
States  they  laid  the  foundation  of  national  defence  and  the
guards  of  civil  liberty,  making  it  at  once  the  means  of  develop-
ing all  the  resources  of  the  nation  and  of  restraining  the  exercise
of  the  civil  force.  They  made  a  partition  of  Sovereignty,  and
assigned  limits  to  the  competency  of  the  several  governments
between  which  it  is  divided.  As  to  the  best  distribution  of
power  between  the  States  and  the  General  Government — and
the  degree  in  which  control  should  be  exercised  by  either,  opin-
ions may  differ,  and  the  distinction  forms  a  line  by  which  parties
will  naturally  divide.  But  that  such  a  partition  should  take
place,  and  that  the  principle  is  admirably  adapted  to  the  main-
tenance of  that  equilibrium,   ever  so  essential   in   the   State,


James  Louis  Petigru  235

between  the  power  of  government  and  the  liberty  of  those  who
are  governed,  can  be  denied  by  no  one  who  has  comprehended
the  subject.  Nor  should  we  cease  to  express  our  gratitude  and
to  adore  the  goodness  of  Providence,  which  placed  in  our  hands
an  instrument  of  peace  and  order,  which  human  ingenuity  could
not  have  devised.  For  unless  the  States  had  existed  in  fact,  it
would  have  been  impossible  to  create  them  for  the  purpose.
Had  the  Mother  Country  looked  to  the  establishment  of  empires
and  kingdoms,  and  British  America  presented  a  unit  of  govern-
ment like  Canada  or  Mexico,  no  human  power  by  artificial  lines,
or  positive  rules,  could  have  made  communities  with  the  attri-
butes of  sovereign  and  independent  states  where  none  rested.
And  if  the  several  states  had  retained  their  separate  nationality
no  constitution  would  have  been  an  effectual  guard  against  vio-
lations of  right.  In  such  states  there  could  be  no  barrier  between
a  dominant  majority  and  the  object  which  they  mean  to  effect.
A  constitution  is  in  fact  intended  to  restrain  the  majority;  but
as  the  people  are  sovereign  and  equal,  the  will  of  the  majority
must  be  paramount,  and  no  constitution  can  transcend  the
sovereign  power  from  which  it  emanates:  but  under  the  control
of  the  Federal  Constitution  there  is  no  absolute  sovereignty,  and
neither  the  whole  people  nor  the  people  of  any  particular  State
have  more  than  a  limited  dominion.  By  this  union  of  the  States
the  independence  of  America  was  crowned  with  liberty  and  order
and  long  may  it  be  impressed  on  the  mind  of  every  citizen  that
the  preservation  of  the  union  is  the  life  of  liberty.  Nor  can  any
man  give  a  test  of  his  sentiments  as  a  citizen  and  lover  of  free-
dom better  than  this,  that  he  who  loves  the  union  really  loves  his
country.

But  does  that  country  deserve  our  love?  Is  there  in  the
result  enough  to  justify  the  pains,  the  cares,  the  sacrifices  made,
and  the  blood  poured  out  for  the  prize  of  American  independence  ?
Let  this  question  be  answered  not  according  to  the  dictates  of  an
idle  vanity,  but  by  a  sober  and  dispassionate  consideration  of  the
circumstances  on  which  that  answer  should  depend.  That  form
of  government,  which  in  the  highest  degree  develops  the  virtues
and  talents  of  society,  and  conduces  most  to  the  advancement  of
its  members  as  a  people,  in  all  that  gives  dignity  and  elevation  of
character  to  the  individual  in  knowledge,  in  morals,  in  the  arts
of  peace  and  the  virtues  that  ensure  success  in  war,  best  fulfils
the  order  and  design  of  Providence  in  the  organization  of  society.
And  for  a  government  that  fulfils  these  conditions  no  sacrifice  is
too  great.  May  we  not  venture  with  a  modest  confidence  to
submit  to  this  test  the  pretensions  of  our  country  .f*

Far  from  us  be  the  sordid  and  ignoble  thought  that  self-indul-
gence is  the  end  and  aim  of  liberty.  It  is  in  the  generous  pur-
suit of  all  that  is  good  and  great,  in  improving  the  earth  and  in
converting  nature  to  the  service  of  man,  in  cherishing  justice,


236  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

and  respecting  the  laws,  the  human  and  divine,  that  a  people
must,  like  the  individual,  employ  their  liberty  to  know  its  value.
Such  was  he,  our  countryman,  who,  alas,  too  early  for  us,  but
not  for  his  fame,  closed,  but  a  year  ago  this  scene  of  mortal  life.
No  more  shall  we  kindle  in  the  glow  which  so  often  warmed  the
heart,  when  some  great  theme  was  touched  by  his  genius,  in  the
forum  or  the  senate.  And  now  on  this  solemn  day  when  we
recall  the  illustrious  deeds  of  Moultrie,  Pinckney  and  Marion,
let  us  not  begrudge  a  tear  to  the  memory  of  Legare,  who  illus-
trated in  his  life,  that  the  republic  is  the  nurse  of  genius;  who
loved  his  country  with  the  ardor  that  republics  only  can  inspire,
and  who  by  his  eloquence,  could  so  well  portray  the  immense
value  of  the  gifts  conferred  upon  us  by  the  liberty  and  union  of
America.
