================================================================================
LETTER #106
================================================================================

TO: WILLIAM  ELLIOTT
LOCATION: Charleston
DATE: 14  December,  1854.
SOURCE: Lines 16321-16679 of LifeLettersAndSpeeches.txt

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

My  dear  EUiott:

I  can  not  sufficiently  express  the  thankfulness  that  I  feel,  in
reading  your  letter  of  yesterday,  to  think  there  is,  at  least,  one
man  of  heart,  to  interest  himself  about  what  concerns  a  fellow
mortal,  though  it  concerns  him  in  no  other  way.  I  have  no
doubt  that  your  intervention  will  be  efficient.  I  don't  wonder
that  you  had  received  no  answer  yesterday,  for,  the  cartel
had  not  been  exchanged.  You  understand,  my  friend,  W.  H.,
as  well  as  if  you  had  studied  his  life.  He  is,  in  fact,  a  live  speci-
men of  the  genus  Planter,  with  many  robust  and  sterling  quali-
ties, which  have  been  kept  obscured  by  the  solitary  life  of  people
that  live  in  the  forest.  There  is  no  doubt  he  is  wrong  in  the
invectives,  for  I  can  call  them  nothing  else,  into  which,  he  has
been  provoked  by  losing  the  game  at  law  in  consequence  of  very
close  play.  But,  I  sincerely  hope  that  you  will  bring  Dr.
deSaussure's  case  under  the  same  pacification  with  the  rest  of  the
quarrel  and  without  opening  the  Verdict,  for  tho'  he  wants  the
Verdict  opened,  that  would  be  to  stir  the  embers  of  the  quarrel
anew.

*  *  *  By  the  way,  my  Address  or  Essay,  before  the  Col-
lege, will  be  printed  and  you  will  see  a  great  deal  about  solidarity


302  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

in  it.  Have  you  heard  of  our  friend  Grayson's  poem?*  It  is
truly  something  surprising.  The  easy  flow  of  his  verses  would
imply  a  long  proficiency  in  the  art  and  his  sylvan  and  aquatic
scenes  are  truly  worthy  of  the  pastoral  wreath.  We  both  figure
in  it  and  there  are  some  lines  which  will,  probably,  be  put  to  the
credit  of  some  of  his  quondam  nullifying  friends.  I  would  be
too  happy  to  spend  Christmas  or  any  holiday  with  you,  but,  on
Saturday  morning,  I  take  the  cars  for  Washington,  to  argue  a
case  in  the  Supreme  Court.  Wish  me  luck,  for,  much  depends
on  it  for  the  future  of

Your  friend,

"Semi-Centennial  Celebration

OF  THE

South  Carolina  College."

ORATION

delivered  by

Hon.  James  L.  Petigru.

charleston,  s.  c.

W^alker  &  Evans,  Stationers  &  Printers

1855

When  Alexander  the  Great  complained  of  his  illustrious  mas-
ter, for  having  exposed  philosophy  to  the  knowledge  of  the  vul-
gar, he  uttered  a  sentiment  familiar  to  antiquity,  and  in  com-
plete unison  with  the  spirit  of  the  age.  The  principle  of  exclus-
ion pervaded  all  early  societies;  hence  distinctions  of  caste — of
classes — of  orders  and  sects.  Even  superstition  had  erected  no
bar  against  common  right;  opinion  in  some  degree,  supplied  the
place  of  laws,  and  the  learned  who  considered  themselves  a  class,
were  little  disposed  to  share  with  the  multitude  the  accomplish-
ments by  which  they  were  honorably  distinguished.  Such  was
the  spirit  of  antiquity,  and  such  the  way  of  thinking  in  the
Middle  Ages.  But  since  the  revival  of  letters,  there  has  been  a
steady  and  progressive  tendency,  to  a  more  liberal  view  of
social  duty.  Society  is  thought  to  owe  more  to  its  members,
and  individuals  are  taught  their  solidarity  in  the  duties  which
unite  society.  Government  is  held  responsible  for  the  evils
which  it  has  the  power  to  remove,  but  suffers  to  exist;  and  the
duty  of  government  is  the  exponent  of  that  obligation  by  which
all  the  members  of  society  are  bound  to  one  another.

It  is  consoling  to  reflect  on  the  changes  which  have  been  oper-
ated in  a  long  course  of  years  by  the  influence  of  this  principle.
The  debtor,  the  lunatic,  and  the  criminal  have  felt  the  frequent
influence  of  the  change.

*"The  Hireling  and  Slave,"  John  Russell,  1854.


James  Louis  Petigru  303

Misfortune  is  no  longer  confounded  with  crime;  the  barbar-
ous laws  that  submitted  the  debtor  to  the  cruelty  of  his  creditor,
after  having  long  excited  the  abhorrence  of  mankind,  are  by
general  consent  laid  aside.  The  sphere  of  charity  is  extended
to  the  inmates  of  the  asylum;  and  force  is  restrained  even  against
those  who  are  bereft  of  reason.  Nor  is  crime  itself  excluded  from
the  pale  of  humanity.  For  ages  no  voice  was  raised  in  favor  of
the  vanquished  and  the  weak,  except  in  Schools  or  Churches;
but  now,  statesmen  have  learned  to  venerate  Humanity,  and  the
people  to  feel  for  the  rights  of  their  common  nature.  But
nowhere  is  the  triumph  of  Humanity  more  signal  than  in  this,
that  the  obligation  of  educating  the  people  is  now  freely  acknowl-
edged.

It  was  no  proof  of  narrow  bigotry  then  on  the  part  of  the
magnanimous  Conqueror  and  Builder  of  cities,  to  consider
philosophy  the  privilege  of  greatness;  and  ignorance  the  proper
lot  of  all  who  were  not  raised  by  fortune  above  the  reach  of
sordid  cares.  Such  was  the  sentiment  of  the  age  in  his  time;
and  if  a  more  liberal  and  generous  way  of  thinking  characterizes
the  opinions  of  rulers  in  the  present  day,  we  are  indebted  for  the
change  to  the  spirit  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  But  the  spirit
of  the  age  itself  depends  no  little  on  the  state  of  education.
Public  opinion  does  not  represent  the  ideas  of  the  majority;  for
the  majority  is  made  up  of  individuals  who  do  not  think  alike.
The  diversity  of  private  sentiment  is  endless  and  proverbial;
but  public  opinion  is  something  definite  and  intelligible,  not  a
mere  aggregation  of  inconsistent  things.  It  is  a  motion  pro-
duced by  the  collision  of  opposing  forces — a  spirit  distilled  from
the  fermentation  of  various  elements  but  differing  from  them  all.
And  the  spirit  of  the  age  represents  not  the  opinions  of  any  par-
ticular portion  of  the  civilized  world;  but  the  general  tendency
of  the  human  mind  at  a  particular  era.  But  education  is  the
external  power  that  gives  activity  to  the  intellect,  which  pro-
duces that  fermentation  of  the  mind  out  of  which  opinion  pro-
ceeds. Therefore  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  modified  by  education
and  an  improvement  in  education  is  not  only  a  positive  gain,  but
an  evidence  of  general  progress — for  as  education  improves,  the
spirit  of  the  age  will  partake  of  that  improvement.

But  of  all  social  improvements,  the  greatest  is  the  diffusion  of
light — the  increase  of  the  educated  class.  To  educate  is  to
civilize — and  to  add  to  the  number  of  educated  persons,  is  to
advance  the  boundaries  of  civilization.  To  educate  is  to  develop
the  faculties  of  the  human  understanding;  and  to  extend  the
blessings  of  education,  by  making  it  universal,  is  to  raise  the
people  in  the  scale  of  being.  Who,  then,  can  doubt  that  it  is  a
duty  to  educate  the  people,  or  deny  that  the  obhgation  which
this  duty  imposes  is  binding  on  the  high  and  low,  the  governors
and  the  governed?     This  is  solidarity.     It  is  the  bright  side  of


304  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

Democracy,  and  if  Egotism  and  Envy  could  be  chained  below,
there  would  be  but  one  opinion  of  it.

It  was  in  the  year  of  1801  that  the  initiative  was  taken  in  the
first  Legislative  Act  for  founding  this  College.  The  period  is
remarkable  as  corresponding  with  a  transfer  of  civil  power —
with  a  revolution  that  changed  the  relations  of  the  parties  which
then  divided— perhaps  to  some  small  degree  may  still  divide  the
opinions  of  men^ — if  not  in  this,  at  least  in  other  States.  It  was
in  a  House  of  Assembly,  where  the  victorious  party  held  yet  only
a  divided  rule;  and  their  adversaries,  though  vanquished,  still
kept  the  field;  that  this  great  measure  was  originated.  It  came
like  the  last  will  and  testament  of  the  expiring  party;  and
sounded  like  a  proclamation  of  the  conquerors,  announcing  the
terms  granted  in  the  hour  of  victory.  It  is  fortunate  to  find
hostile  parties  agreeing  in  a  great  principle.  Indeed  it  is  a  proud
reflection  that  whatever  may  be  the  extravagance  or  madness  of
party,  opposition  to  learning  is  no  instrument  of  popularity  in
America.

But  though  the  spirit  of  our  countrymen  is  too  high  for  an
alliance  with  ignorance,  there  were  not  wanting  objections,
both  popular  and  specious,  to  the  endowment  of  this  College  out
of  the  public  Treasury.  The  immediate  benefits  of  a  college  are
received  by  those  only  who  are  educated  in  it;  the  number  of
these  must  necessarily  be  few;  and  the  assistance  which  they
derive  from  the  State,  is  a  species  of  Protection,  rendered  still
more  invidious  by  the  fact,  that  it  is  in  a  great  measure  confined
to  those  who  are  already  in  a  more  eligible  situation  than  the
generality.  In  such  circumstances  the  opportunity  for  appeal-
ing to  prejudice  was  too  favorable  to  be  neglected.  The  pittance
wrung  from  the  hard  hand  of  reluctant  poverty  it  was  said,  was
to  be  lavished  on  the  education  of  the  rich.  Those  who  were  in
possession  of  the  advantages  of  education  were  to  levy  a  tax  on
the  poor,  to  perpetuate  those  advantages  by  educating  their
sons  at  the  public  expense.  The  majority  were  to  bear  their
full  proportion  of  the  Burthen,  but  the  recompense  was  most
unequally  distributed.  And  these  topics  might  be  urged  with
more  show  of  reason,  because  there  was  then  no  provision  for
common  education  by  means  of  Free  Schools.  It  was  hard
that  the  rich  should  be  assisted  by  the  public  treasury  in  giving
their  sons  an  education  suitable  to  their  situation  in  life;  while
the  children  of  the  poor  were  taught  at  their  own  expense.  It
was  strange,  that  the  State  should  come  to  the  aid  of  the  rich;
and  leave  the  poor  unassisted  to  struggle  with  their  difficulties.
With  that  class  of  politicians  who  think  that  the  public  welfare
is  best  promoted  by  leaving  every  man  to  take  care  of  himself;
and  with  all  those  who  disclaim  a  Solidarity  in  the  obligation  of
the  State  to  its  members,  these  objections  might  have  had  great


James  Louis  Petigru  305

weight.  Let  us  do  justice  to  the  wisdom  and  foresight  of  the
men  of  1801,  who  rejected  such  ungenerous  counsels.

It  is  our  grateful  task  to  commemorate  the  virtues  of  our
Founders — to  celebrate  the  triumph  of  liberal  principles  over  a
narrow,  egotistic  policy  and  to  mingle  our  congratulations  over
the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  day  when  South  Carolina  College
welcomed  the  first  student  to  its  hospitable  halls.  If  any  doubts
were  entertained  of  the  expediency  of  establishing  this  seat  of
learning  at  the  public  expense  they  have  long  since  disappeared.
No  one  now  doubts  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  State  to  make  liberal
provision  for  the  higher  branches  of  education.  Such  provision
must  be  made  by  the  State,  because  such  establishments  are  too
costly  for  individual  enterprise.  The  enterprise  of  individuals,
sustained  by  the  prospect  of  commercial  profits,  may  scale  the
mountain  barriers  that  vainly  interpose  their  heights  to  the
invasion  of  the  Engineer  and  the  progress  of  the  Railroad.  But
the  hills  of  Parnassus  are  proverbially  barren  and  literature
tempts  no  capitalist  with  the  hope  of  dividends.  Without  the
patronage  of  the  State  it  would  be  impossible  to  erect  the  costly
buildings,  to  collect  the  learned  men  and  supply  all  the  materials
requisite  for  a  seat  of  learning  adapted  to  a  high  and  compre-
hensive seat  of  study.  And  if  it  be  asked  for  what  use  such  a
college  is  wanted  the  answer  is  that  such  an  establishment  is
necessary  to  the  progress  of  improvement.  Curiosity  is  the
spring  of  literary  and  scientific  research.  It  is  excited  by  the
knowledge  of  what  has  been  discovered — by  acquaintance  with
the  methods  of  investigation — by  emulation  and  the  inter-
course of  kindred  minds.  It  is  in  colleges  that  these  causes  are
in  full  operation.  They  stimulate  activity,  keep  pace  with  the
improvements  of  the  age  and  furnish  inquiring  minds  with  the
means  of  further  progress.  It  is  a  law  of  our  nature  that,  if
society  be  not  progressive,  it  will  decline.  Colleges,  therefore,
are  institutions  of  necessity,  and  where  they  answer  the  purposes
for  which  they  are  founded  amply  repay  the  generous  patronage
of  the  public,  although  they  add  nothing  to  the  stock  of  material
wealth.

Fifty  years  have  passed  and  we  have  crossed,  for  the  first  time,
the  threshold  of  the  new  Hall,  where  the  future  anniversaries
of  this  College  are  to  be  celebrated.  The  old  chapel  and  the
early  days  of  this  institution  will  henceforth  be  invested  with  a
sort  of  historical  interest.  When  we  survey  the  flowing  river  we
are  prompted  by  a  natural  curiosity  to  know  from  what  distant
springs  it  takes  its  source,  and  I  revert  from  this  splendid  dome
to  the  Incunabula  of  our  College  with  more  pleasure,  because  it
affords  the  opportunity  of  rendering  the  poor  tribute  of  posthum-
ous applause  to  the  memory  of  its  first  president,  my  revered
master.

Jonathan  Maxcy  exerted  no  little  influence  on  the  character


306  J^iJ^-,  Letters  and  Speeches

of  the  youth  of  his  day  and  his  name  is  never  to  be  mentioned
by  his  disciples  without  reverence.  He  had  many  eminent
qualifications  for  his  office.  His  genius  was  aesthetic;  per-
suasion flowed  from  his  lips  and  his  eloquence  diffused  over
every  subject  the  bright  hues  of  a  warm  imagination.  He  was
deeply  imbued  with  classical  learning  and  the  human  mind
divided  his  heart  with  the  love  of  polite  literature.  With  pro-
found piety,  he  was  free  from  the  slightest  taint  of  bigotry  or
narrowness.  Early  in  life  he  had  entered  into  the  ministry,
under  sectarian  banners,  but  though  he  never  resiled  from  the
creed  which  he  had  adopted — so  catholic  was  his  spirit — so
genial  his  soul  to  the  inspirations  of  faith,  hope  and  charity —
that,  whether  in  the  chair  or  the  pulpit,  he  never  seemed  to  us
less  than  an  apostolic  teacher.  Never  will  the  charm  of  his
eloquence  be  erased  from  the  memory  on  which  its  impression
has  once  been  made.  His  elocution  was  equally  winning  and
peculiar.  He  spoke  in  the  most  deliberate  manner;  his  voice
was  clear  and  gentle;  his  action  composed  and  quiet;  yet  no  man
had  such  command  over  the  noisy  sallies  of  youth.  His  pres-
ence quelled  every  disorder.  The  most  riotous  offender  shrunk
from  the  reproof  of  that  pale  brow  and  intellectual  eye.  The
reverence  that  attended  him  stilled  the  progress  of  disaffection,
and  to  him  belonged  the  rare  power — exercised  in  the  face  of
wondering  Europe  by  Lamartine — of  quelling  by  persuasion  the
spirit  of  revolt.

The  bachelor's  degree  was  conferred,  for  the  first  time,  in
1806 — and  then  upon  one  student,  Anderson  Crenshaw,  the
Protagonist  of  this  school.  He  made  his  solitary  curriculum
without  an  associate,  and  thereby  gave  an  example  of  indepen-
dence which  accorded  well  with  the  integrity  of  his  mind.

May  it  ever  be  characteristic  of  our  school  to  pursue  the  path
of  honor,  even  if  it  be  solitary.  May  the  man  whom  this  College
enrolls  among  her  sons  ever  retain  the  firmness  to  stand  alone
when  duty  and  conscience  are  on  his  side.  Nor  was  our  pro-
tagonist unworthy  of  these  anticipations.  He  was  elevated  to
the  Chancery  Bench  in  Alabama,  and  when  he  occupied  the
judgment  seat  we  may  be  sure  that  the  balance  of  Justice  was
never  disturbed  by  a  sinister  influence.

The  list  of  graduates  rose  the  next  year  to  four,  and  in  1808
a  numerous  class  increased  the  reputation  of  the  College,  more
by  their  abilities  than  by  their  numbers.  In  that  constellation
was  one  bright  star  which  was  only  shown  to  the  earth  and  then
set  prematurely,  but  which  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  if  the
memory  of  virtue  is  entitled  to  live.  When  I  look  on  the  place
once  familiar  to  his  voice  Imagination  invests  the  scene  with  the
presence  of  George  Davis,  such  as  he  was  in  youth — in  health
— the  pride  of  the  Faculty,  the  Monitor  and  Example  of  the
school.     When  he  was  to  speak  no  tablets  were  needed  to  record


James  Louis  Petigru  307

the  absent — every  student  was  in  his  place.  It  is  a  traditionary
opinion  that  the  orator  is  the  creature  of  art.  Poeta  nascitur,
orator  fit.  But  those  who  heard  the  youthful  Davis  would  go
away  with  a  different  impression.  The  maxim,  indeed,  does  not
deserve  assent  further  than  this,  that  when  the  Orator  has  to
deal  with  the  actual  affairs  of  life  he  must,  to  persuade  and  con-
vince, be  master  of  all  the  details  of  his  subject,  often  requiring
great  minuteness  and  variety  of  knowledge,  the  fruit  of  sedulous
labor  and  attentive  study,  whereas,  the  poet  addresses  himself
to  those  sentiments  and  emotions  characteristic  of  our  common
nature  which  are  revealed  by  the  faculty  of  consciousness  and
self-examination.  But  Davis  was  already  an  Orator.  Before
he  began  to  speak,  his  audience  was  rendered  attentive  by  his
noble  countenance,  in  which  the  feelings  of  his  soul  were  expres-
sively portrayed.  In  language  pure  and  flowing,  equally  free
from  rant  or  meanness,  he  poured  out  generous  sentiments  or
pursued  the  line  of  clear  and  methodical  argument.  To  gifts
so  rare  was  joined  the  utmost  sweetness  of  temper,  and  his  man-
ners were  as  amiable  and  his  conduct  as  free  from  eccentricity
as  if  he  had  been  a  stranger  to  the  inspirations  of  genius.  Early
in  his  senior  year  he  withdrew  from  College,  and  before  the
wheels  of  time  had  ushered  in  the  day  for  conferring  degrees  the
news  that  George  Davis  was  no  more  fell  like  a  chill  on  the
hearts  of  his  fellow-students.  They  thought  of  the  legends  of
Cleobis  and  Biton,  as  embodying  a  sentiment  true  to  the  feelings
of  nature,  and  owned  that  the  grave  of  one  so  bright,  so  blame-
less and  so  young,  must  have  often  suggested  the  thought  that
it  is  not  to  the  favorites  of  Heaven  that  long  life  is  granted.
Nearly  fifty  years  have  passed  since  the  grave  closed  on  all  that
was  mortal  of  George  Davis,and  few  now  remain  that  ever  felt  the
grasp  of  his  cordial  hand,  but  many  long  years  may  pass  before
tears  will  flow  for  one  so  bountifully  endowed  or  society  sustain
an  equal  loss.

In  strong  contrast,  within  the  same  group — to  memory's
view — stands  the  robust  frame  of  Nathaniel  Alcock  Ware.
His  intellect  was  like  a  fortress  built  upon  a  rock;  the  flowers  of
fancy  grew  not  in  the  shade  of  its  battlements.  The  pursuits  of
literature  did  not  satisfy  the  cravings  of  a  mind  like  his,  which
loved  to  grapple  with  subjects  that  required  the  strength  of  his
herculean  arm.  His  memory  was  capacious  of  the  most  multi-
farious nomenclature  and  science  was  congenial  to  his  taste.  In
college  exercises  he  uniformly  outran  the  professor,  and  when
the  class  was  entering  on  a  new  study  he  was  preparing  to  quit
it,  or  was  already  engaged  in  exploring  some  more  distant  field.
Nor  was  his  mind  less  discriminating  than  apprehensive,  and
the  mass  of  information  with  which  his  memory  was  stored  was
readily  reduced  to  order  and  method  by  the  strength  of  his
judgment.     Neither  did   he  lack  the  kindlier  affections,   and
