================================================================================
LETTER #33
================================================================================

TO: WILLIAM    DRAYTON
LOCATION: Charleston
DATE: 11  June,  1834.
SOURCE: Lines 7905-8566 of LifeLettersAndSpeeches.txt

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

My  dear  Sir:

I  ought  to  have  taken  an  earlier  opportunity  to  answer  your
letter  of  the  1st,  but  hope  you  will  be  willing  to  receive  my  ex-
cuse. The  Court  of  Common  Pleas  adjourned  on  Saturday,
until  that  was  over  I  had  a  good  deal  to  do.     Besides  I  have


James  Louis  Petigru  141

contracted  an  exceeding  bad  habit,  that  of  disHking  the  pen.  It
grows  so  much  upon  me  that  in  self  defense  I  beheve  I  shall  have
to  make  a  point  of  writing  a  certain  quantity  every  day.  If
something  of  that  sort  is  not  done  it  seems  to  me  I  shall  soon
be  in  as  bad  a  condition  as  those  who  never  had  a  writing  master
at  all.

Unfortunately  the  first  rumour  which  we  received  of  the  de-
cision on  the  test  oath  went  beyond  the  reality.  The  judgement
is  by  a  majority  only;  Harper  dissents  and  thereby  gives  the
sanction  of  his  name  to  the  discontents  excited  by  the  decision.
The  first  explosion  was  at  Columbia  and  the  temper  and  spirit
of  their  resolutions  were  perfectly  Jacobinical.  The  rage  to
which  they  gave  way  in  Charleston  far  exceeded  what  I  had
supposed  would  take  place  and  up  to  the  time  of  the  meeting
at  the  Circus  I  was  very  anxious  about  the  result.  The  ex-
governor  had  a  conversation  with  me  and  I  really  thought  that
when  he  began  to  raise  his  voice  and  speak  of  the  future  action
of  the  party  his  eyes  were  lighted  up  with  an  expression  of  mis-
chievous purport.  The  meeting  at  the  Circus  took  place  and
there  was  less  excitement  than  I  expected.  It  was  surmised
that  the  legislature  would  be  convened  and  a  convention  called.
The  Circus  meeting  did  not  allude  to  a  convention  and  left  it
to  the  wisdom  of  the  governor  to  call  the  legislature.  The  next
day  the  governor  responded  to  the  call  of  the  Circus  by  announc-
ing that  he  should  not  call  the  legislature.  The  Circus  resolved
that  the  associations  should  be  reestablished,  but  I  am  not  sure
that  they  will  be  able  to  rally  the  same  numbers  again.  In  fact
the  exhibitions  of  the  last  few  days  induce  me  to  think  the  Nulli-
fiers  in  the  Circus  have  rather  gone  beyond  the  feeling  of  their
men,  and  that  the  agitation  will  languish.  Yet  they  will  proba-
bly have  the  same  majority  which  they  had  last  year  and  alter
the  4th  article  of  the  Constitution  by  incorporating  the  word
allegiance  in  the  constitutional  oath.  In  fact  the  word  allegi-
ance is  not  such  a  mighty  terror,  and  as  we  have  got  rid  of  the
supposition  that  the  ordinance  is  to  regulate  the  meaning  of  the
oath,  I  suppose  our  people  will  take  it.  It  is  surmised  that  Mr.
Dunkin  will  be  added  to  the  Court  of  Appeals.     *     *     *

Yours  truly,


142  ^i/<?)  Letters  and  Speeches

An

Oration

delivered  before  the  Washington  Society

on  the

Fourth  July,  1834

By  James  Louis  Petigru


Published  by  request


Oration


This  day,  fellow  citizens,  which  recalls  the  Declaration  of
American  Independence,  brings  with  it  the  associations  of  a  train
of  great  events.  We  are  irresistibly  carried  back  to  the  con-
templation of  the  colonies  in  a  state  of  peaceful  dependence  on
the  mother  country,  and  to  a  review  of  their  subsequent  progress
through  the  risks  and  hardships  of  the  Revolution,  and  the  dis-
orders of  an  unsettled  and  feeble  polity,  to  the  attainment  of  a
free  and  stable  government,  in  the  adoption  of  the  federal  Con-
stitution. If  we  could  raise  our  minds  to  a  just  and  lively  con-
ception of  all  that  was  done  and  suffered  to  make  this  memorable
day  a  national  jubilee — could  we  realize  the  scenes  of  this  great
drama — no  lesson  could  be  more  instructive;  no  representation
could  be  more  powerful,  to  purify  the  feelings  and  amend  the
heart.

The  settlement  of  the  colonies  was  coeval  with  that  struggle
between  liberty  and  prerogative,  which  in  its  progress  kindled
a  civil  war  in  England,  and  led  to  the  expulsion  of  the  reigning
family.  The  early  settlers  were  deeply  imbued  with  sentiments
favorable  to  a  popular  form  of  government,  and  this  disposition
was  fostered  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed.
The  territorial  divisions  were  fixed  by  grants  which  the  crown
from  time  to  time  had  made  to  individuals  or  companies.  These
grants  were  also  charters  of  incorporation  on  a  great  scale,  mak-
ing the  inhabitants  a  corporate  body,  with  ample  jurisdiction
over  subjects  of  a  local  nature.  The  colonies  therefore  were
separate  communities  after  the  example  of  free  cities,  that  have
a  particular  government  and  a  domestic  jurisdiction.  These
political  societies  had  no  interference  in  the  affairs  of  one  another
but  they  were  all  fellow-subjects.  They  acknowledged  one
sovereign,  and  the  tie  of  allegiance  was  the  common  bond  of
Union.  The  legislative  power  of  Parliament,  never  distinctly
defined,  was  in  practice  limited  in  a  great  measure  to  the  regu-
lation of  commerce,  and  the  people  claimed,  and  generally  en-
ioyed  the  privileges  of  the  British  constitution.  Under  a  system
thus  mild  and  rational,  the  growth  of  the  colonies  was  no  less  a
subject  of  wonder  and  admiration  than  a  source  of  unexampled
prosperity  to  the  mother  country.


James  Louis  Petigru  143

But  in  the  course  of  time  the  natural  hostility  between  sover-
eignty and  liberty  began  to  appear.  The  legislative  authority
which  Parliament  had  always  to  a  certain  extent  exercised  in
America,  was  made  the  foundation  for  the  claim  of  absolute
power,  and  the  duty  of  the  people  of  the  colonies  was  perverted
into  the  idea  of  an  unconditional  subjection  to  the  will  of  Parlia-
ment. The  promulgation  of  such  doctrines  alarmed  the  jealousy
of  liberty,  and  the  pretensions  of  Parliament  were  met  in  the
spirit  of  determined  resistance.  At  length  an  act  of  Parliament
for  raising  a  revenue  in  America  brought  the  controversy  to  a
point  from  which  there  was  no  receding.  The  common  danger
and  the  community  of  their  rights  as  British  subjects  united  the
provinces  at  first  in  remonstrance  and  finally  in  arms.  In  vain
did  the  advocates  ot  the  ministry  endeavor  to  justify  their  meas-
ures. In  vain  did  they  urge  "  that  there  must  be  in  every  State
a  supreme,  absolute, uncontrolled  authority  in  which  the  Jura
summi  imperii,  or  right  of  sovereignty  reside."  Our  forefathers
had  not  learned  that  allegiance  was  due  to  any  but  lawful  au-
thority. Still  less  inclined  were  they  to  entertain  the  monstrous
proposition  that  despotism  is  of  the  essence  of  government.  No
sophistry  could  impose  upon  them  to  admit  that  sovereignty  is  in
its  nature  unlimited.  They  rejected  as  mere  verbal  criticism
assumptions  of  power  founded  on  the  definitions  of  sovereignty
and  allegiance,  and  regarded  as  "vain  wrangling  all,  and  false
philosophy,"  arguments  designed  to  prove  their  allegiance  in-
volved the  obligations  of  unconditional  obedience.  The  phil-
osophy which  proceeds  by  experiment  and  induction  is  not  more
different  from  the  learning  that  attempted  to  find  out  nature
by  reasoning  from  first  principles  than  the  views  of  the  authors
of  American  Independence,  from  all  systems  of  government
built  upon  shadowy  abstractions.  The  American  people  went
to  war  with  the  mother  country  for  their  inherited  rights  and
privileges.  The  right  of  resistance  belongs  by  the  law  of  nature
to  every  oppressed  people,  but  our  forefathers  fought  to  retain
the  freedom  in  which  they  were  born.  The  exemption  which
they  claimed  from  all  taxation,  except  by  their  own  representa-
tives, was  in  strict  conformity  with  the  British  constitution,
and  with  immemorial  usage.  When  all  measures  of  reconcili-
ation had  been  exhausted;  when  the  sword  was  drawn,  and  there
was  no  alternative  but  revolution  or  treason,  they  took  their
ground  with  the  intrepidity  of  men  that  could  look  danger  in  the
face,  and  proclaimed  the  independence  of  the  United  States.

Such  were  the  causes  and  origin  of  the  War  of  the  Revolution.
For  seven  long  years  did  the  American  people  wage  a  doubtful
contest  with  an  enemy  that  had  attained  the  very  highest  emi-
nence in  national  greatness;  rendered  implacable  by  wounded
pride,  and  stimulated  to  incredible  exertions,  by  the  confidence
of  fancied  superiority.     Cold  must  be  the  heart  that  does  not


144  ^c/^j  Letters  and  Speeches

warm  with  the  contemplation  of  this  picture,  and  acknowledge
with  pious  gratitude  our  obligations  to  the  Almighty,  that
blessed  the  cause  of  our  forefathers,  and  supported  them  through
the  dark  days  of  their  almost  hopeless  conflict.  The  strong-
holds of  the  country  were  subdued,  and  many  a  disastrous  battle
dimmed  the  hopes  of  liberty.  On  many  a  field  the  blood  that
was  poured  out  in  defense  of  freedom  lay  unavenged;  and  many
a  mother  wept  for  her  fallen  sons  with  bitter  anticipations  of
her  country's  fate.  But  the  spirit  of  the  people  was  unsubdued,
and  the  indissoluble  Union  of  the  States,  which  no  jealousy
could  undermine,  were  the  best  assurances  of  ultimate  success.
Neither  the  want  of  arms,  of  money,  nor  of  the  necessities  of
life  could  shake  the  firmness  of  Congress,  nor  seduce  the  fidelity
of  the  patriot  army.  The  steady  resolution  displayed  in  the
counsels  of  America,  and  the  magnanimous  sacrifices  of  her  sons
in  arms,  commanded  the  respect  of  the  nations,  and  secured  the
alliance  of  powerful  friends.  The  foe  was  broken  by  the  energy
of  a  resistance  that  would  not  yield;  victory  at  length  rested  on
the  arms  of  America;  and  millions  hailed  with  delight  the  star
of  peace  once  more  resplendent  over  the  land  of  freedom.

The  independence  of  the  United  States  was  acknowledged  by
the  treaty  of  1783,  and  a  just  cause  was  crowned  with  the  most
glorious  success.  A  great  revolution  was  effected  and  a  people
of  British  name  and  origin  were  irrevocably  separated  from  the
parent  stock.

But  the  glory  of  this  day  consists  not  in  the  downfall  of  power
but  in  the  establishment  of  a  new  and  more  beautiful  order  of
things.  Revolutions  have  been  common,  but  it  was  reserved
for  the  sages  of  America  to  bring  back  again  the  times  of  the
Republic;  to  restore  a  name  that  had  almost  been  forgotten  by
the  nations — and  to  exhibit  in  these  late  ages  the  example  of  a
Free  Commonwealth.  Here  is  the  source  of  the  joy  and  gratu-
lation  with  which  the  return  of  this  day  is  welcomed.  This  it
is  which  has  rendered  the  American  Revolution  a  great  event
in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  made  it  a  resting  place  in  the  prog-
ress of  history.  But  the  first  difficulties  only  had  been  yet  over-
come; the  consummation  was  still  deferred  and  the  United  States
was  to  pass  through  many  trials  after  their  independence  was
acknowledged  before  the  promise  could  be  fulfilled,  and  the
people  could  repose  "every  man  under  his  own  vine  and  fig
tree,"  in  the  conscious  security  of  a  just  and  stable  government.

Nor  did  it  require  less  virtue  to  establish  the  Constitution
than  to  overcome  the  arms  of  Britain.

When  the  rupture  between  the  mother  country  and  the  colo-
nies took  place.  State  governments  were  naturally  and  easily
organized,  because  they  were  built  on  the  basis  of  the  Colonial
governments  But  to  establish  a  common  jurisdiction  in  the
place  of  that  which    had  been  swept  away,  was  an  undertaking


James  Louis  Petigru  145

in  which  it  was  necessary  to  build  anew.  Neither  the  same
powers  which  the  several  colonies  had  recognized  in  the  general
superintendence  of  the  mother  country,  nor  the  same  forms
were  any  longer  applicable.  The  adjustment  of  the  common
duties  which  the  war  had  imposed  on  the  States  and  the  regu-
lation of  their  common  interests  required  a  superintending  and
controlling  power.  But  to  organize  such  a  power  required  a
new  system  for  which  the  times  afforded  neither  leisure  nor
experience.  A  union  of  the  heart  and  hand  was  created  by
necessity;  afterwards  by  the  articles  of  confederation — such
powers  and  such  only  as  the  exigencies  of  the  times  demanded
were  vested  in  Congress.  Self  preservation  made  the  States
cooperate  in  the  common  defense  and  preserved  the  Union  in
despite  of  the  defects  of  the  Confederacy.  But  the  return  of
peace  brought  new  duties  for  the  discharge  of  which  something
more  than  the  independent  action  of  the  States  was  necessary —
a  great  public  debt  had  been  contracted,  the  channels  of  trade
were  obstructed,  and  industry  was  at  a  stand.  To  discharge
this  debt — to  superintend  the  relations  of  peace  and  war — and  to
open  a  commercial  intercourse  with  foreign  countries  were  the
duties  of  Congress;  but  the  power  of  effecting  these  objects  was
everywhere  wanting.  The  State  governments  were  essentially
local  in  their  character.  By  the  articles  of  the  Confederacy  the
States  were  sovereign,  but  they  were  sovereign  in  a  condition
of  perpetual  minority;  and  the  gratifications  of  State  pride  re-
sulted in  the  dishonorable  privileges  of  a  legal  disability.  In
separating  from  Great  Britain  the  colonies  had  no  design  of
separating  from  one  another.  On  the  contrary,  a  strict  Union
among  themselves  was  indispensable  to  the  freedom  and  inde-
pendence to  which  they  were  heart  and  soul  devoted.  The
general  interests  were  intrusted  to  Congress;  but  in  their  feeble
hands  the  public  prosperity  was  withering  away.  The  general
confusion  was  increased  by  a  disputed  boundary  with  Spain,
the  hostility  of  the  Indian  tribes  and  the  occupation  of  the  west-
ern country  by  British  garrisons.  The  public  creditor  called
in  vain  for  justice,  and  private  distress  went  hand  in  hand  with
national  bankruptcy.

Five  years  of  embarrassment,  weakness  and  confusion,  suc-
ceeded to  seven  years  of  glorious  but  desolating  war — and  a  new
revolution  was  approaching.  The  people  of  the  United  States
were  really  fellow-citizens  by  birth:  the  several  States  were  in
fact  but  members  of  one  body.  The  interests  which  the  States
could  not  regulate  were  essentially  interwoven  with  the  whole
structure  of  Society,  and  for  the  want  of  a  common  jurisdiction
the  people  were  to  a  considerable  degree  deprived  of  the  pro-
tection of  any  government.  The  dissolution  of  the  confed-
eracy appeared  to  be  inevitable — and  the  only  way  of  safety  lay
in  the  concession  of  high,  important  and  sovereign  powers  by


146  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

the  States.  Such  sacrifices,  however,  could  only  be  expected
from  the  most  generous  and  enlightened  patriotism.  The  love
of  sway  is  so  natural  to  the  human  mind  that  the  voluntary
resignation  of  power  will  always  constitute  an  exception  to  the
ordinary  conduct  of  men.  The  establishment  of  a  national
government,  therefore,  encountered  all  manner  of  opposition
as  well  from  the  interested  ambition  of  some,  as  from  the  honest
fears  of  others.  But  sentiments  more  worthy  of  the  virtuous
days  of  the  Republic,  a  sense  of  justice,  a  high  feeling  of  national
honor,  a  generous  love  of  country  at  length  prevailed;  and  the
States  adopted  the  decided  measure  of  appointing  delegates
to  the  Convention  of  1787.  To  this  memorable  council  every-
thing most  venerable  in  character,  most  distinguished  in  service,
and  eminent  in  abilities,  was  seen  repairing  from  all  parts  of
America.  Their  duties  were  equally  novel  and  arduous,  and
the  difficulties  which  surrounded  them  almost  insurmountable.
During  the  whole  summer,  from  May  to  September,  they  dis-
cussed the  nice  and  difficult  balance  between  the  States  and
the  General  Government,  and  the  distribution  of  the  powers
with  which  the  General  Government  should  be  invested.  Nor
did  they  close  their  deliberations  till  they  had  devised  and  com-
pleted a  system  which,  for  comprehensiveness  of  plan,  the  ac-
curacy of  the  method,  and  the  harmonious  adaption  of  the
parts,  easily  surpasses  the  work  of  all  former  law-givers,  and
justly  challenges  the  character  of  a  masterpiece  of  wisdom.

The  unanimity  of  the  Convention  was  a  great  source  of  joy.
But  the  battle  was  not  yet  won — the  Constitution  was  still  to
undergo  the  severe  scrutiny  of  the  States  in  Convention.  There
the  debate  was  renewed  with  zeal,  caught  from  the  passions
which  most  powerfully  excite  the  mind.

Every  objection  was  urged  which  ingenuity  could  form,  and
every  point  was  defended  with  all  the  skill  of  argument,  and  force
of  intellect.  For  a  whole  year  the  decision  was  suspended.  In
many  a  stormy  debate  the  cause  appeared  to  be  lost,  and  in
many  a  narrow  division  the  Constitution  was  saved  by  a  few
votes.  But  at  length  reason  triumphed  over  prejudice;  the
accession  of  1 1  States  terminated  the  struggle  which  the  powers
of  chaos  had  maintained  with  the  principles  of  order,  and  the
long  period  of  doubt  was  closed  by  the  adoption  of  the  Federal
Constitution.  Such  were  the  trials  through  which  our  fathers
passed,  and  such  the  difficulties  of  founding  the  seat  of  Liberty
in  this  Western  world.  History  affords  no  parallel  of  a  people
taking  up  arms  in  defence  of  their  liberty,  prosecuting  the  war
with  the  highest  fortitude  and  courage,  to  a  successful  termina-
tion; and  afterwards  in  time  of  profound  peace,  calmly  discuss-
ing, and  deliberately  adopting  a  free  Constitution  for  the  gov-
ernment of  themselves  and  their  posterity.  Nor  were  the  actors
in  these  great  scenes  unworthy  of  the  parts  they  were  called  to


James  Louis  Petigru  147

perform.  And  as  in  the  representation  of  Genius  the  plot  is  not
considered  perfect,  without  some  preeminent  personage  who
fills  the  highest  part,  and  is  distinguished  as  the  hero  of  the
scene;  so  the  moral  sublimity  of  this  grand  national  exhibition
is  raised  to  the  highest  degree  and  perfected  in  the  character  of
Washington.  In  him  we  behold  a  model  of  virtue  and  great-
ness, to  rescue  the  human  name  from  obloquy,  to  teach  men  the
truth  of  their  celestial  origin,  and  to  revere  in  their  common
nature  the  presence  of  something  noble  and  divine.  Let  the
grateful  task  of  commemorating  the  fame  of  Washington  and
his  companions  be  committed  to  an  eloquence  more  worthy  of
the  theme.  Their  names  are  recorded  in  history,  and  there  may
every  one  who  feels  for  the  honor  of  Carolina  read  with  exulta-
tion that  Rutledge,  the  pride  of  the  South,  and  his  compatriots
were  equally  distinguished  as  the  defenders  of  liberty,  and  the
zealous  champions  of  the  Union.

Thus  was  the  settlement  of  things  in  the  United  States  ef-
fected; and  those  who,  by  their  own  good  swords,  had  made  the
States  sovereign,  animated  by  a  disinterested  zeal  for  the  public
good,  retrenched  the  prerogatives  of  the  State  to  make  the  national
government  supreme  within  its  proper  jurisdiction.  To  estab-
lish justice,  ensure  tranquility,  and  secure  the  blessings  of
liberty,  were  the  high  and  noble  motives  of  the  authors  of  the
Constitution.  Does  any  one  regret  their  choice.''  To  appre-
ciate their  political  wisdom,  look  around.  The  gloom  which
hung  over  America  has  been  dissipated.  No  hostile  tribes  any
longer  disturb  the  peace  of  the  frontiers.  The  Mississippi,  no
more  a  Spanish  river,  bears  on  its  bosom  a  vast  commerce,  the
produce  of  the  Western  country  now  converted  into  the  seat
of  new  and  flourishing  States:  Commerce  no  longer  languishes
in  our  bays  and  rivers,  but  spreads  its  sails  in  every  sea,  and
rides  in  proud  security  beneath  the  starry  banner:  The  credi-
tor no  longer  complains  of  violated  faith;  the  public  debt  is  paid,
and  justice  waves  her  peaceful  scepter  over  a  land  that  smiles
with  plenty.  But  shall  it  be  said  that  the  necessity  of  the  Union
no  longer  exists.'*  that  the  Constitution  has  served  its  day,  and
may  now  be  consigned  to  its  place  among  the  trumpery  of  a
by-gone  age?  God  forbid — too  often  have  the  best  hopes  of
men  been  blasted  by  the  presumption  of  success;  too  often  have
the  wholesome  lessons  of  experience  been  supplanted  by  the
flattery  of  those  false  friends  with  whom  the  summer  of  pros-
perity abounds.  Union  and  Liberty  are  essentially  connected.
Let  presumption  forbear  and  learn  that  those  whom  God  has
joined  shall  never  be  separated  without  incurring  the  doom  of
a  heavy  retribution.

There  are  two  dangers  against  which  a  free  State  must  always
provide,  domestic  faction  and  foreign  conquest.  The  Federal
Constitution  is  the  only  effectual  safe-guard  against  both.     It


148  Lije^  Letters  and  Speeches

provides  ample  means  against  foreign  aggression,  and  is  the
very  best  security  against  the  tyranny  of  faction.  Without  the
Union  South  Carolina  would  be  a  simple  consolidated  govern-
ment; but  in  such  a  state,  when  a  combination  exists  powerful
enough  to  ensure  a  majority,  laws  afford  to  the  proscribed  mi-
nority but  a  feeble  security.  That  such  combinations  will  take
place  is  certain,  for  the  tendency  to  party  is  inherent  in  the
human  mind;  and  they  will  be  most  prevalent  in  small  States,
because  in  them  the  intimate  association  of  all  the  members  of
the  community  creates  a  more  lively  interest  in  the  individual
fortunes  of  every  leader — brings  the  excitement  of  controversy
into  every  house,  and  kindles  the  minds  of  all  by  the  passions
of  a  few.  But  the  Federal  Constitution  keeps  party  within
bounds  by  limiting  the  amount  of  power  and  patronage  that  can
be  obtained  by  getting  possession  of  the  States.  To  lay  hold
of  supreme  power  it  is  necessary  to  surmount  the  barriers  of  the
Federal  Constitution,  as  well  as  those  of  the  State  Constitution.
If  the  Union  was  abolished  any  party  that  gained  the  complete
ascendancy  in  the  State,  would  have  all  things  at  their  com-
mand—the appointment  of  Ambassadors,  Generals,  and  Naval
Commanders,  with  the  direction  of  military  forces,  in  addition
to  all  the  appendages  of  the  present  civil  Hst.  Such  patronage
could  not  fail  to  excite  the  cupidity  of  that  class  numerous  in  all
countries,  that  desire  to  live  on  the  public  burdens;  and  the
possession  of  supreme  power  would  present  to  ambitious  minds
an  object  of  the  highest  attraction.  The  contention  for  public
favor  would  be  carried  on  with  inextinguishable  zeal,  where  the
prizes  of  success  were  so  brilliant.  The  dominant  party  would
be  above  all  law,  and  the  identity  of  State  sovereignty  and  des-
potism would  be  verified  in  fact.  Nothing  could  be  more  falla-
cious than  the  opinion  that  interest  is  the  only  ground  of  party,
or  that  no  parties  are  dangerous  but  those  which  are  separated
by  a  difference  of  interest.  The  truth  is  the  other  way.  Such
an  opinion  could  only  be  suggested  by  a  narrow  view  of  that
comparative  exemption  from  domestic  faction  for  which  we
are,  in  fact,  indebted  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.
The  distinction  between  two  governments.  State  and  Federal,
has  a  great  tendency  to  unite  the  people  of  each  State  among
themselves.  But  parties  founded  on  difference  of  principle  and
opinion,  aggravated  by  foreign  influence,  naturally  the  bane  of
Republics,  would  spring  up  in  rank  luxuriance  among  the  people
of  the  same  State  as  soon  as  the  barriers  of  the  Federal  Consti-
tution were  removed.  Whatever  therefore  tends  to  destroy
the  Federal  Constitution,  instead  of  increasing  liberty,  strength-
ens power;  divides  the  people  of  the  State,  instead  of  uniting
them;  and  opens  the  door  to  the  excess  of  faction.  But  do  not
our  own  times  furnish  a  new  and  instructive  lesson  on  this  sub-
ject?    The  Union  Party  and  the  NuUifiers  are  divided  by  a  dif-


James  Louis  Petigru  149

ference  of  opinion  as  to  State  Rights.  And  can  there  be  a
stronger  illustration  of  the  violence  of  party  than  is  found  in
the  fact  that  now,  in  the  complete  ascendency  of  party,  the
same  arguments  are  actually  employed  against  the  minority,
which  the  British  Ministry  in  1776  relied  on  against  America
to  show  that  sovereign  power  can  not  be  limited?  Private
rights  must  give  way  to  Imperial  Sovereignty  of  the  State,  and
party  zeal  is  not  satisfied  till  it  has  been  carefully  and  exactly
demonstrated  that  a  majority  of  two-thirds  may  well  do  what-
ever any  despot  can  inflict  on  his  unhappy  subjects.  Kings
would  trample  upon  law  by  virtue  of  divine  right — party  leaders
claim  to  do  the  same  thing  by  virtue  of  the  sovereignty  of  the
people.  That  Constitution  which  sets  some  limits  to  the  State
Sovereignty  needs  no  higher  eulogy  than  the  alliance  thus
avowed  between  sovereignty  and  despotism.

The  deplorable  defects  of  party  in  the  Republics  of  Greece
and  Italy  are  written  in  every  page  of  their  history.  But  why
seek  for  foreign  examples?  If  there  be  any  abuse  of  power  par-
ticularly odious  and  revolting,  it  is  the  presumption  of  attempt-
ing to  bind  the  human  mind  in  chains,  and  to  make  opinion  the
subject  of  penalty.  And  of  all  the  people  under  Heaven,  our
fellow  citizens  of  South  Carolina,  where  a  majority  has  so  re-
cently seen  fit  to  change  their  principles,  ought  to  be  incapable
of  aiming  such  a  blow  against  freedom  of  opinion.  Yet  even
here  no  sooner  was  party  ascendency  complete  than  the  reign
of  proscription  began — by  test  oaths  and  pretentious  threats  of
laws  against  treason.  In  March,  1833,  a  Convention  claiming
supreme  imperial  power,  the  Jura  sutnmi  imperrii,  ordained  that
it  should  be  lawful  for  the  Legislature  in  their  discretion  to  exact
an  acknowledgment  of  such  supreme  authority,  by  a  suitable
oath  of  allegiance,  as  a  test  of  qualification  for  office;  and  to  se-
cure State  Sovereignty  by  giving  a  free  scope  to  the  laws  of
treason.  And  in  December  of  the  same  year  the  Legislature
responded  by  vacating  all  offices  in  the  militia,  and  requiring  all
the  new  officers  to  make  upon  oath  that  profession  of  allegiance,
which  the  Ordinance  required.  A  judiciary,  of  whom  any  coun-
try might  be  proud,  are  now  denounced  for  vindicating  the
Constitution  from  this  assault.  We  still  trust  that  the  people
will  not  consent  to  see  the  faithful  guards  of  the  temple  of
Liberty  overpowered  in  the  defense  of  their  post.  But  if  man-
kind must  have  a  new  proof  how  surely  justice  is  trampled  under
foot  by  party,  and  the  judges  who  have  defended  the  Constitu-
tion from  the  first  inroad  of  lawless  power  must  be  sacrificed
to  its  rage,  their  decision  will  at  least  be  an  enduring  record  of
the  freedom  that  was  enjoyed  before  the  Test  Oaths  began,  and
an  imperishable  monument  of  moral  firmness  and  judicial  in-
tegrity.

The  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  an  axiom  of  Liberty.     But


1 50  Life^  Letters  and  Speeches

that  sovereignty  is  a  shield  to  defend,  not  a  sword  to  destroy  the
private  citizen.  It  lives  and  moves  and  has  its  being  in  the
supremacy  of  the  Constitution.  Apart  from  the  attributes  of
constituted  authority,  it  becomes  undistinguishable  from  wild
force  and  lawless  power.  It  is  not  the  natural  right  of  man  to
overturn  existing  establishments,  and  to  construct  new  govern-
ments: for  this  is  a  right  to  which  all  men  are  entitled.  But  the
sovereignty  of  the  people  is  the  characteristic  of  constitutional
government;  and  the  meaning  of  it  is  that  all  power  is  held  in
trust  for  the  people,  and  all  public  authority  exercised  for  their
benefit.  The  rights  and  jurisdiction  of  an  independent  nation,
whether  under  the  form  of  monarchy,  despotism,  or  a  common-
wealth, are  called  sovereign  powers,  and  under  our  complex
system  those  rights  belong,  some  to  the  State  and  some  to  the
United  States.  There  is  no  place  in  the  nature  of  things  for
any  other  sort  of  sovereignty.  Why  should  we  lose  sight  of  the
realities  to  wander  in  a  field  of  barren  abstractions?  The  Con-
stitution of  the  United  States  is  not  a  mere  system  drawn  up
from  first  principles,  but  a  primary  law,  adapted  to  the  existing
state  of  things.  If  it  makes  distinctions  which  are  inconsistent
with  the  definition  of  sovereignty  it  is  not  on  that  account  less
obligatory.  But  even  if  there  had  been  no  necessity  for  it  in  the
actual  circumstances  of  the  country,  the  wit  of  man  could  have
devised  no  happier  invention  for  the  security  of  freedom  than
the  partition  of  Sovereignty  between  the  States  as  members  of
the  Confederacy,  and  the  Union  as  the  superintending  and  con-
trolling authority — a  distribution  which  abridges  the  reach  of
power  and  shortens  the  arm  of  Government.

These  considerations  would  justify  our  zeal  for  the  Union.
But  when  it  is  remembered  that  war  between  the  States  must
inevitably  follow  their  separation;  that  schemes  of  conquest  or
of  defense  would  lead  infallibly  to  large  military  establishments:
we  are  astonished  at  the  bhndness  of  those  who  will  not  see  the
necessary  connection  between  Union  and  Liberty.  From  the
day  that  the  Federal  Constitution  is  abolished  the  sword  will
never  be  laid  aside  till  the  avenger  comes  and  the  tumult  of  fac-
tion is  hushed  in  the  tranquility  of  despotism.  The  fate  of
unhappy  Poland  is  before  our  eyes:  and  what  a  warning  do  the
calamities  of  that  country  of  many  sovereigns,  hold  out  to  the
people  of  these  States.  Brute  force  and  superiority  of  numbers
have  triumphed  over  valor  and  justice,  and  swords  drawn  in  the
most  righteous  cause  to  which  a  gallant  people  ever  invoked  the
favor  of  Heaven,  are  shivered  in  the  dust.  United  among  them-
selves, the  Poles  might  have  defied  the  world  and  sent  the  bar-
barian howling  to  his  own  deserts.  But  neither  valor  that  mocks
at  fear  nor  the  sympathies  of  all  hearts  in  which  the  sense  of
justice  is  not  dead,  could  save  that  devoted  people  from  the
fatal  catastrophe  of  internal  divisions.     Let  him  who  derides


James  Louis  Petigru  151

the  Federal  Constitution;  who  thinks  there  is  nothing  sacred  in
the  bond  of  Union,  enjoy  the  short-Hved  applause  of  ephemeral
popularity;  but  the  profound  wisdom  and  exalted  public  virtue
of  the  founders  of  the  Constitution  will  command  the  lasting
veneration  of  mankind;  and  the  meed  of  praise  and  honor  shall
be  awarded  to  him  whose  name  descends  to  posterity  connected
with  the  noble  sentiment — "  The  Federal  Union — //  Musi  be
Preserved."

To  preserve  that  Union  should  be  considered  now,  as  in  the
time  of  Washington,  "  the  greatest  interest  of  every  true  Ameri-
can." Nor  is  it  to  be  denied  that  the  times  are  portentous  of
change.  New  theories  concerning  sovereignty  and  the  binding
force  of  the  Constitution  are  abroad.  Let  us  pass  by  the  con-
sideration of  the  effects  that  must  ensue  from  principles  that
put  the  Constitution  under  the  feet  of  a  majority  of  two-thirds
in  any  State,  if  those  principles  be  carried  out  in  practice;  we
need  not  dwell  on  the  consequences  of  exclusive  allegiance  when
disputes  arise  concerning  the  boundary  of  jurisdiction  between
the  public  authorities;  we  will  say  nothing  of  the  lawfulness  of
establishing  the  creed  of  a  party  as  the  standard  of  orthodoxy,
upon  a  subject  so  interesting  to  every  freeman,  so  complicated,
and  necessarily  giving  rise  to  so  great  a  diversity  of  opinion  as
the  true  balance  of  power  under  the  Constitution.  We  take
for  granted  that  the  new  theory  is  not  infidelity  to  the  Constitu-
tion, and  the  followers  of  this  sect  are  really  willing  to  remain
within  the  pale  of  the  Union.  But  let  us  consider  for  a  moment
the  moral  influence  of  the  theory  in  weakening  the  sense  of  pub-
lic duty.

There  is  in  morals  a  distinction  between  duties  that  are
merely  positive  and  those  that  are  founded  on  the  great  princi-
ples of  justice.  The  distinction  between  allegiance  to  the  State
and  obedience  to  the  United  States,  implies  that  the  one  is
natural  and  the  other  merely  conventional;  and  that  the  duty
of  the  citizen  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  United  States  has  no  sanc-
tion beyond  that  of  a  rule  making  a  difference  between  two  things
in  themselves  indifferent.  No  one  would  pretend  to  make  a
merit  of  such  obedience  or  to  dignify  it  with  the  name  of  virtue.
Patriotism  is  the  sentiment  which  makes  obedience  honorable.
But  if  the  citizen  owes  no  allegiance  to  the  United  States  it  is
not  his  country  and  his  obedience  is  at  best  but  a  mercenary
service.  If  the  Federal  Constitution  does  not  make  us  fellow-
citizens  it  can  be  regarded  in  no  other  light  than  a  foreign  yoke,
and  every  feeling  of  patriotism  must  be  enlisted  against  it.  The
theory  which  makes  selfishness  the  only  spring  of  action  may  be
compatible  with  the  exercise  of  generous  virtues,  and  the  heart
correct  the  errors  of  understanding.  Opinions  which  are  de-
grading to  the  obligations  of  the  Constitution  may  perhaps  be
harmless  in  practice;  but  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  these


1 52  J^ije^  Letters  and  Speeches

opinions  can  be  enacted  into  law  without  becoming  in  some
measure  a  rule  of  conduct;  and  when  those  who  call  themselves
citizens  of  the  United  States  are  marked  as  enemies  of  the  State
it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that  the  foundations  are  in  danger.
Force  secures  obedience  in  countries  that  are  not  free,  but  the
Republic  requires  a  more  perfect  service,  the  free  will  offering  of
the  heart,  the  spontaneous  affection  of  the  people.  Deprived
of  the  support  of  patriotism,  all  constitutions  are  but  dross.
Though  Washington  sleeps  with  the  mighty  dead,  we  have  his
testimony  in  the  solemn  warning  he  has  left  us,  that  without
a  cordial^  habitual^  and  immovable  attachment  to  that  National
Union,  which  makes  us  one  people,  our  faith  in  the  Constitution
is  in  vain.

Another  venerable  name,  now  numbered  with  the  dead,  calls
to  us  from  the  grave  to  stand  by  the  Union  as  the  Palladium  of
Liberty.  LaFayette,  the  early  friend  of  America,  whose  gen-
erous life  was  one  long  struggle  against  tyranny,  has  terminated
his  earthly  career.  Many  are  the  names  in  the  honored  roll  of
patriotism  to  fire  the  mind  with  the  love  of  virtuous  fame.  But
this  distinguished  son  of  France  gained  for  himself  a  peculiar
claim  to  our  gratitude — we  love  to  dwell  on  the  youthful  en-
thusiasm, the  high  spirit  of  adventure  that  brought  this  young
disciple  of  liberty  from  the  Court  of  France  to  become  the  par-
taker of  the  hardships  of  an  American  camp.  It  was  not  mili-
tary glory  but  a  noble  passion,  a  zeal  for  liberty,  a  generous
sympathy  with  a  people  struggling  to  be  free,  that  made  him
prefer  the  rude  tents  of  America  to  the  palaces  of  kings.  His
profound  veneration  for  the  character  of  Washington  was  the
ingenuous  homage  of  a  mind  uncorrupted  by  factitious  distinc-
tions to  true  dignity  and  greatness.  The  same  principles  gov-
erned his  conduct  through  the  whole  of  a  long  and  arduous  life.
He  saw  with  delight  the  day-spring  of  liberty  in  his  native  coun-
try, and  watched  its  progress  with  eyes  of  longing  devotion.  He
was  doomed  to  behold  the  cruel  reverse  of  all  his  hopes;  and  to
see  again  and  again  abortive  efforts  to  establish  a  free  constitu-
tion overwhelmed  by  the  blind  rage  of  the  multitude;  destroyed
by  the  base  ascendency  of  demagogues,  or  crushed  by  the  iron
hand  of  military  despotism.  But  to  his  latest  days  he  preserved
the  same  generous  sentiments  that  had  animated  his  youthful
mind,  and  midst  the  wreck  of  European  liberty  still  regarded
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  as  the  Beacon  Light  in  the
darkness  of  the  storm.  Yes,  generous  shade!  thy  pilgrimage
is  closed — thine  eyes  are  spared  the  angviish  which  the  extinction
oithat  light  would  cause  to  all  who  venerate  the  name  of  Liberty.
Long  shalt  thou  be  remembered    for  unshaken    fidelity  to  the

cause  of  freedom.

Faithful  found
Among  innumerable  false;  unmoved,
Unshaken,  unseduced,  unterrified.


James  Louts  Petigru  153

And  long  may  that  Constitution,  which  claimed  thy  love  and
admiration,  defy  the  rage  of  faction  and  perpetuate  the  Liberties
of  the  Great  Republic  which  owns  thee  for  a  citizen,  and  now
surrounds  thy  tomb  with  the  memorials  of  a  Nation's  Gratitude.

Yours  truly,
